Hi friends in this video let us analyse the time
and space complexity of the bubble
sort algorithm in the previous videos we have
learned what is bubble sort and how to implement it
Let us analyse the time complexity
First let us assume the arr
size is five let us see The best case
First the best case will be when the array elements
are already sorted
And for the outer loop when i equal to zero the
inner loop will have four iterations
That is for J
equal to 0 to size minus one minus i
That is five minus one minor zero which is four
and each time this if will be checked that is
four times it will be checked
But in no iteration if will become true
So no swap operation will take plus so flag will
not be set to one
And when we check the flag value it is still
the same
So we can understand We have already sorted elements so
break out of the loop
So for size equal to five we had four iterations
that is size minus one iterations and if size is
equal to n then we will have n minus one
iterations and n minus one and n are polynomially
the same
So the best case time complexity is order of n
So that was the best case
Now what about the worst case let us see for the
outer loop when i equal to zero
The inner loop will be executed for four times
That is for J
equal to 0 j equal to one J equal to Two
and J equal to
three that is from zero to SIZE minus one minus i
So in the first iteration of outer for Loop the
Inner Loop statement executed four times
Next when i equal to one the inner loop will be
executed for J
equal to 0 j equal to one and j equal to
two So in the second iteration of the outer for
loop the inner loop statement will be executed three times
next when I equal to two the inner loop will be
executed for J equal to 0 and J equal to one
So in the third iteration of outer for loop the
inner loop statement executed two times
Next when I equal to three the inner loop will
be executed only one time
That is for J equal to 0
So in the fourth iteration we had the inner loop
statement executed for one time
Next when i equal to four this condition will fail and
the outer for loop will stop its execution
so when size
equal to five the total time taken T(x)
is equal to one plus two plus three plus
four which is size minus one
So in general when size equal to n T(X)
equal to one plus two plus three plus etc
plus n minus one
That is the sum of natural numbers from 1 to n
minus one
And we know that the sum of natural numbers from
one To n is equal to n into n plus one
divided by two
Here the last number is n minus one so we
can replace n as n minus one in the equation
So we will get n minus one into n minus
one
plus one divided by two and this minus one in
plus one will get cancelled
So this will become n minus one into n divided
by two that is n square minus n divided by
two
So we got the time required Now how to get
the time complexity
here
Just find the degree of this pollynomial
And here it is two
So we have the worst case time complexity of bubble
sort algorithm equal to order of n square
So that was about the time complexity
Now let us do the space complexity analysis and space complexity
is the total amount of space a particular algorithm takes
to produce the output
So here array arr takes n units of memory and size
will take one unit of memory
And in the next statement we have I j and
Flag and each will take one unit of memory
So total space s(x) equal to n plus four
And here the degree is one
So the space complexity will be order of n
Now let us discuss about the auxillary space complexity
And as we learned auxillary space is the extra
space or the temporary space used by an algorithm here
array arr and size all given inputs
The extra memory used by the bubble sort algorithm is
for I J and flag
So one unit of space for I one for J
and one for flag
So total space equal to three units
So that was the auxillary space used by this
algorithm
So we can say the auxillary space complexity of
bubble sort algorithm is order of one since the Total
auxillary Space is a constant
And as we already learned if is sorting algorithm sorts
all the elements without using any extra memory or sorts
all the elements with auxillary space complexity as order
of one
Then we can call that sorting algorithm as an inplace
sorting algorithm and here the bubble
sort algorithm can sort all the elements with auxillary
Space complexity equal to order of one so we can
call bubble sort algorithm As an inplace sorting algorithm.